I ate a diet that's very normal for a
British person I gained so much weight
got in this vicious cycle of overeating
anxiety sleeplessness scanned my brain
and if I'd continued for a year I would
have Dr Chris Van toin doctor researcher
and a b award-winning broadcaster Chris
forensically examines the effects Ultra
processed food have on us all 75% of the
calories that are consumed globally come
from six companies a food mafia they are
controlling our food and what we eat
engineers to be consumed to excess
whether it's a burger from a fast food
chain or a supermarket bread everything
is adjusted so that Things become
irresistible and a pandemic of diet
related diseases has taken over the
world one in five people in this country
get 80% of their calories from ultral
processed food poor diet has overtaken
tobacco as the leading cause of early
death on planet Earth and for the age of
five kids in this country will be that
much shorter 9 cm compared to other
countries and it is all diet now you
can't stunt a body by 9 cm and not also
stunt them intellectually why don't we
just all make better choices I have
almost no interest in personal
responsibility this is about social
justice and people without money they're
forced to eat bad food if you got rid of
poverty you would get rid of around 60%
of the problem of diet related disease
what about the people that say this is
just about calories in calorie out there
are two very big problems with that and
this is very good robust science the
first is that and if people are
listening and they want to lose weight
the evidence
says
I just want to start this episode with a
message of thanks a thank you to
everybody that Tunes in to listen to
this podcast by doing so you've enabled
me to live out my dream but also for
many members of our team to live out
their dreams too it's one of the
greatest privileges I could never have
dreamed of or imagined in my life to get
to do this to get to learn from these
people to get to have these
conversations to get to interrogate them
from a very selfish perspective trying
to solve problems I have in my life so I
feel like I owe you a huge thank you for
being here and for listening to these
episodes and for making this platform
what it is can I ask you a favor I can't
tell you how much um you can change the
course of this podcast the the course of
the guests were able to invite to the
show and to the course of everything
that we do here just by doing one simple
thing and that simple thing is hitting
that subscribe button helps this channel
more than I could ever explain the
guests on this platform are incredible
because so many of you have hit that
button and I know when we think about
what we want to do together over the
next year on this show a lot of it is
going to be fueled by the amount of you
that are subscribed and that tune into
this show every week so thank you let's
keep doing this and I can't wait to see
what this year brings for this show for
us as a community and for this
[Music]
platform Dr Chris
vanel you wrote a book ultr processed
people I know from firsthand experience
that writing books is a painful
experience it takes a long long time to
do it and you have an extensive
experience across medicine um across
different sort of scientific
disciplines why does this book and this
subject matter matter to society and
maybe even more importantly why did it
matter enough to you it matters to all
of us because for a very long time we've
been incredibly confused about what to
eat and we've called the foods that
harmless junk food and processed food
and high fat salt sugar food and we've
we've not had a way of labeling Foods
even as a pandemic of diet related
disease has take taken over the world
really and this is particularly true now
in low-income countries and particularly
true with low-income people living in
the UK so poor diet which means a diet
high in ultra-processed food has
overtaken tobacco as the leading cause
of early death on planet Earth for
humans for the animals we farm and for
wild animals of course because ultr
processed food is produced by a food
system that is the leading cost of cause
of loss of biodiversity the second
leading cause of carbon emissions and
the leading cause of plastic pollution
so about 12 years ago the definition was
developed to
describe a western industrial American
diet and it was done by a team in Brazil
and much of the best work on this stuff
has been done by teams in Central and
South America because what they saw in
those countries whereas this is crept up
on in the UK in places like Mexico and
Colombia and Brazil obesity was
essentially unheard of and within a
decade it went to being the dominant
public health problem in towns in Mexico
you wouldn't know anyone who was living
with obesity and within a decade
everyone would know someone who'd had an
amputation for type 2
diabetes the only thing that had changed
was the influx of broadly an American
diet industrially processed foods so the
definition was
invented 2009 20 2010 and we've had a
decade of evidence now that is very
clear that it is ultr processed food
that is responsible not just for
pandemic weight gain and obesity but
also for a long list of other health
problems including early death why did
this matter so much to
you what is the personal reason here
I've I'm an identical twin I've got a a
brother who lived with obesity for a
very long time and I would my weight
would fluctuate I'm I'm insulated by by
privilege by my surroundings by
education but I'm always on the brink of
weight gain and I recognized in myself
uh that I lived with an addiction to
many ultr processed products and my
brother particularly did and so at the
core of the book
is it was this sort of moment of
understanding where I there are several
sort of fulcrums in the book I suppose
but but two of the key elements are
first of all for many of us ultr
processed food isn't just harmful it is
addictive and it makes all the criteria
for addiction and it has there's so much
evidence that for some people these
products are as addictive as tobacco
products drugs of abuse alcohol
gambling but that nagging people is
really really harmful so I'd had a very
toxic relationship with my brother and
in fact our the whole family we're very
close family but we had for the better
part of a decade been nagging him to
lose weight and I took him to see a
behavioral change expert who said to me
I don't need to speak to to sand I need
to speak to you I said no no he's the
fat one you got to speak to him he said
no you are the problem for your brother
to lose weight will be to lose an
argument that's been a decad long with
you you are the barrier and so because
I'd been nagging him I owned his problem
and he didn't own
it and so at the heart of the book is
this this idea that nagging people
generally pushes them toward doing
things that that are harmful it
generally makes them more likely to do
the thing you're you're naging them
about and I've tried to engage with
these products when we come to
individual Solutions I've tried to
engage with ultrapress food as an
addictive substance a substance that I
was addicted to what is the balance
there between personal responsibility
and being a victim of circumstance in
the in the sort of food landscape and
society that we live in because there's
a there's obviously been a huge debate
around obesity and and weight you know
there's one school of thought maybe over
on the more extreme side that says just
get out there and you know make better
choices in your life and go I don't know
go for a run or something and then
there's another school of thought that
says weight gain and obesity are a
byproduct of genetic the our genes and
the environment we live in what is the
truth in your view and in the case of
your brother I think we have really
really good
evidence that personal responsibility
that these arguments around will parent
personal responsibility are morally
scientifically and economically
redundant they they have no
value so when it comes to population
Health there are loads of different ways
we can argue this if we look at
willpower in so far as it's ever been
operationalized for research and there's
not a huge
amount the research and you will know
some of this the research is quite
nuanced but broadly it serves as a proxy
for poverty so the original marshmallow
experiment which I think you've talked
about where you you offer a child a
marshmallow and say you know we'll give
you another one if we come back in five
minutes and you haven't eaten this one
that experiment those children who were
unable to resist the
marshmallow went on to really suffer in
life they had much uh across all kinds
of different indicators their lives were
much more troubled they had lower
achievement economically and and
socially what it turned out is when you
adjusted for maternal education the
effect went away in other words the kids
who were taking the marshmallow were
from poor households and they were
making a sensible choice they were
taking an opportunity when it arose
because if you come from a situation of
uh deprivation or disadvantage often
things that are promised never
materialize so once you you controlled
for that in the studies broadly your
ability to resist a marshmallow age4
predicts the household you're from you
might be from a low education low income
household doesn't predict anything else
so that's one way of looking at willp
Power and there's lots of other evidence
the other thing is that if we look at
weight in the mid 1970s and this is um
you know American government data there
was a sudden inflection in weight gain
where that the Obesity pandemic took off
around 1975 and you look at a graph it's
bumbling along it's suddenly everyone
goes up when I say everyone black white
hispanic men women you know 5ye olds 50y
olds 90y olds everyone starts gaining
weight so unless you're going to propose
when it comes to weight gain that there
was some failure of moral responsibility
in young hispanic men and older black
women and middle-aged white
people you know that just doesn't Stack
Up what changed was the food environment
so my feeling is the only thing that is
interesting to talk about is the
structure of the society around us and
and we have really good evidence that
when when you simply give people money
we've done this this research has been
done by economists by doctors by social
scientists when you give people money
they make smart choices rich people
don't eat bad food because they don't
want to eat bad food and people without
money eat bad food because they're
forced to eat bad food and the the
cognitive dissonance that you and I were
talking about quite often we will find
people with low incomes making quite
cogent arguments about the food that
they eat appearing to side with the
companies that are predating on them
because otherwise how could you live
with this dissonance in your life
otherwise you're just a powerless victim
of of transnational food corporations so
I I have almost no interest in personal
responsibility I think you if you give
people technical knowledge and you give
people income and opportunity most
people want to be healthy and live good
lives 1970 the food environment
changes can you tell me exactly how the
food environment changed that caused
multiple demographics
to to to gain weight there are two
answers to that one the the sort of
approximate reason is the invention of
ultra-processed food so the
industrialization of of food supply you
can you can talk about why that happened
in a lot of different ways part of it
was to you know a a booming population
post-war uh and these products were
extremely convenient they allowed women
to continue to be in the workplace of
course women had entered the war entered
the workplace in the war so there were a
lot of things that were immediately
appealing about these products TV
dinners Swanson TV dinners appear in the
in the 50s and by the time of the s
these products had become very
widespread so in the same thing we were
a decade behind in the UK but this this
stuff is now our national
diet why exactly it took over is the
subject of a lot of the research I'm
doing at the moment so now I work much
more with economists the nutritionists
and what we see is the
financialization of the food industry so
the primary uh determinance of almost
every action that happens in almost
every food company that supplies say 90%
of our calories all the indicators are
Financial they're not to do with public
health and so we can use Financial
indicators we can use Financial research
to to show that the food industry does
these things like buy cheap debt use
that to do uh share BuyBacks rather than
generating value we can show that they
vote down uh activist investors will
vote institutional investors we'll vote
down Public Health proposals at uh
shareholder meetings and so part of it
is the Takeover of the food system from
being a system where people would grow a
lot of their own food make food at home
they buy ingredients from local shops to
a small number of companies supplying
food so now uh 75% of the calories that
are consumed globally come from six
companies there are about 15 to 20
companies that make most of the food we
eat in the UK that that primary that
process the food so we've got a very
small number of Agri business produc
juers that make more or less 12 things
that you know we eat broadly pigs cows
and chickens those are our Meats we
don't really eat other meat maybe a bit
of lamb maybe goat maybe Goose not
really duck perhaps so we eat really
three meats and then our main sources of
calories come from four or five crops
corn rice wheat soy Palm bit of
sunflower so the human diet which should
Encompass thousands perhaps tens tens of
thousands of different species of thing
has now because of the pressures of of
commercial efficiency become reduced to
a very small number of companies with
enormous power um producing making a
very small number of food products and
needing to generate intellectual
property it's kind of like sounds like a
mafia of sorts like a food
Mafia I'm going to let you say that yeah
well [__] no don't let me say it don't
want them coming for me
um I think it's I don't mean it to sound
malevolent so the argument I've just
made can sound a bit neo- Marxist or
anti-growth or antic capitalist and I I
really don't mean it to sound like that
but it is important to understand the
incentives within the system and if the
incentives are Financial you'll end up
with ultra processed food so the logic
of the food is the cheapest possible
ingredients with the longest possible
shelf life and maximum intellectual
property what is ultr processed food
so broadly there are three types of food
there's unprocessed a whole food which
might be like an apple or an oyster or
you can drink milk out of a cow you
shouldn't because you get brucelosis but
you can do it that's whole unprocessed
food then there's processed food so
there's uh butter so we can take whole
milk we can process it into butter or
cheese now we've been doing that so
North African pastoralists started doing
this in the Sahara region maybe 7 8,000
years ago started making Dairy
and if you can make butter you get all
the vitam fat soluble vitamins uh from
milk you get very high calorie and it
almost never goes off it's really long
shelf life similarly cheese add a bit
ferment it add some salt you get a long
shelf life very nutritional product so
those are processed foods and we've been
eating processed foods for over a
million years I mean humans are the only
animals that have to process their Foods
we it you know food processing has
shaped our Jaws our teeth our guts so
compared to any animal of similar size
we have tiny little teeth minuscule
fragile Jaws very short guts because
we've extended our digestive tracts out
of our bodies and into our kitchens we
chop food rather than chewing it we cook
it rather than uh digesting it so our
food is is pre-digested so processed
food is good tinning canning
concentrating fermenting salting smoking
all these projects techniques were
invented really by women over hundreds
of thousands of years working in cave
and huts and shelters and then kitchens
they produced modern food and diets from
the high Arctic to you know sea mamal
diets from the high Arctic pescatarian
diets in East Asia vegan diets of South
Asia any traditional diet you point to
is basically associated with good health
all of them they've all evolved in
different ways same is true of French
cuisine rich in butter and red wine the
only diet that we've studied that really
seems to bring Health harms is an ult
ultr processed diet so that is the
American financialized industrial diet
so ultr
processing is about using these
commodity ingredients that I just listed
you know commodity ingredients like soy
corn rice and a bit of meat reducing
them into powder form basically so if
you grow corn the market I mean you
understand all this much better than me
you you get money in finance the market
for cobs of corn spread with butter and
salt is pretty limited if you grow cobs
of corn you can sell a few of them but
if you can turn the rest of them into
corn starch which you can modify and
turn it so it's like you can create any
chemical property that starch you want
you can turn it into corn oil and you
can turn it into high fructose corn
syrup suddenly you have the ingredients
for every single food product on the
planet so the logic is to take your corn
break it into pastes and powders with an
infinite shelf life then recombine them
with additives texturize them flavor
them put aown brand on it and then you
can add just enormous value and a lot of
the ingredients we see in ultr processed
food are waste products from old food
processing so whey what the Whey
proteins we see in our nutritional
powders I mean this was a waste product
from dairying you know we used to be
spread on fields or fed to cows but now
the value you add instead of it being
used for fertilizer the value you add
when you turn it into a nutritional
supplement is a thousandfold probably
more than a thousandfold um Citrus fiber
you'll see Citrus fiber is an ingredient
in a lot of bars sounds healthy doesn't
it like it's um you know citrus fruit
fiber what could be and it probably is
reasonably healthy it's left over from
the juice the juicing and tinning
Industries where you have to get the
peel off fruit and if you put it through
a set of chemical processes you can
extract the fiber add it to the human
food chain and create enormous value so
the logic of ultr processed food really
is about creating products with
intellectual property that use the
cheapest ingredients you can that will
last for a long time and from what I
understood there the that last process s
step three so you had Whole Foods then
you had processed foods then you had
Ultra processed foods and in the ultra
processed foods category what they're
doing is taking the good stuff out and
putting some bad stuff in is that a
simple way to think about it I would
think I think that is a very simple way
that's a straightforward way of thinking
about it the additives are not really
the problem so the problem I would say
some of the additives we think are
harmful we've got some quite good
research around some of the artificial
sweeteners some of the modified starches
uh zanam gum um the emulsifiers and some
of the colorings and textur and then we
have some research that says the fact
the food is is mechanically processed so
hard it's generally very soft so think
of any ultr processed food you can
whether it's a a burger from a fast food
chain or a bref bref cereal or
Supermarket bread um uh generally these
calories are soft and and they're energy
dense because they're dry and so dry
frood is important for shelf life the
softness and the energy density means
you consume them very quickly and so you
essentially consume them before you
become full and so that's one of the
ways they drive over cons excess eating
so so if if you like the laundry list of
the ways in which the food harms us is
softness energy density some direct
harms from the additives a lack of
phytonutrients so it doesn't contain
much real food and real food real plants
and animals should have a great variety
of molecules and chemicals that we don't
understand very well but vitamins from a
plant seem to interact with you very
differently from than vitamins in an
extract but the main thing is the way
the foods are developed so I spoke to so
many people in the food industry who
were all Wonderful by the way you know I
I I've really enjoyed most of all
talking to them but the food scientists
all said the same thing that the
products are generally put through um a
focus group so you start with your box
of cereal that you've been making for
for decades and you have formulation a
and then you make a new formulation
formulation B you put it through the
focus group if the focus group eats box
B quicker than box a box B is the one
that goes on the Shelf because if they
eat it 5% quicker you'll sell the boxes
5% faster and that's that's the
financial indicator and so it's not any
one aspect of the food that's harmful so
much as when the intention is to create
products that people will use as much as
possible then you end up with addictive
food interesting it Evol the food is put
through if you like a almost a darwinian
evolutionary process where every single
thing every dial is tweaked on every
product every few months everything is
adjusted from the sweet salt sugar
ratios to the texture in the mouth to
the color of the packet and everything
is DED up to 11 so that Things become
irresistible and you maybe you don't
live with this but people who many
people listening will recognize in
themselves that there are products that
they cannot stop eating they fantasize
about them they think about them and
once they start eating them they will
consume five adult portions and my I've
got a six-year-old and a three-year-old
and my six-year-old can eat five adult
portions of any sugary breakfast cereal
in about 20 minutes I brought some food
along with me today I'm looking at it
cuz I wanted to get
distracting I wanted to get your opinion
on it so I brought um a group of food
products on the left here now these are
things that I I think growing up I
thought were good yeah
so you're very bold with these Brands I
mean you're really limiting sponsorship
opportunities well you
know you know I do think about that
sometimes but I also they don't really
care I I think like I'm in The Pursuit
Of Truth here so much of why I do this
is to educate myself and I I think if I
educate myself then I'll help educate
other people that's why I'm also okay
being a total idiot on this subject
matter because that is the truth so here
I've got four products that
are typically seen as being quite
healthy breakfast cereal Cheerios I grew
up thinking good for me um actal good
for me Diet
Coke great cuz there's no sugar in there
and then this
is whole grain whole grain bread 50% of
your daily whole grain in just two
slices great
perfect so for a start I have a slight
une EAS I am going to talk about these
products I have a slight une talking
about any one product the evidence
applies to the category of food and this
kind of stuff in a sense I think you're
ABS these are such brilliant
choices because this is the foundation
of our diet and one of the things that's
happening at the moment is is the food
industry exploring painting me as a
snob because I'm I'm critiquing these
sort of core things you know tins of
beans with flavoring or Supermarket
bread fish
fingers I think this stuff is at the
shallow end of the pool in a way it's
not by any means the worst stuff but in
a way it presents the biggest moral
hazard because we think it's so healthy
can I have the diet coke y so Diet Coke
is my is my favorite example because
this is the Ultimate Health Food
according to the way we label food at
the moment it has four where's the
camera it's all green on the um it's
four green traffic lights right what
what does what do they call that that
traffic light system on the so this is
the way we describe healthy whether a
food is healthy or not in this country
at the moment and this system is quite
influenced by the food industry and it
breaks all foods down into fat sat
saturated fat sugars and salt and says
that you know if those are the bad
things and if a food is behind them
it'll it'll have oranges and greens so
if you look at the Cheerios they're most
they're mostly on the front it's on the
front it's optional by the way so it's
not always on every packet but the
Cheerios are oranges and greens yeah now
part there is a baked in confusion for
this because what do you do at a traffic
light that's orange and green or red
orange and green do you go do you stop
is it on the ACL is it is it on it's not
on there no I couldn't see it on there
it maybe on the
bottom
it's optional so who knows if you know
we we don't we don't have any way in
this country of describing either
healthy food or unhealthy food other
than these traffic lights anyway this is
a healthy food now if we look at the
ingredients on the diet coke carbonated
water fine now there's a color called
caramel e150d caramel makes you think of
you traditional it's it's a French 19th
century invention burned sugar Creme
Brule it's like it's a bit naughty but
it's fine caramel e150d has nothing to
do with caramel it is um carbohydrate
treated with a mixture of acids and and
uh and heat to produce uh things that
contain ammonium and sulfite so it's
it's it's a food additive color um with
no no benefits nothing to do with
caramel um artificial sweeteners
aspartame and asame K now sweeteners are
tricky because we know sugar is harmful
because it rots teeth and it promotes
weight gain because it makes you eat
more the weird thing about sweetness is
they don't seem to help with weight loss
at all they may some of them seem to be
more metabolically harmful than sugar
itself humans are quite good at eating
sugar when we eat lollipops continuous
continuously as kids or have sugary
drinks it's not good for us but human
societies have for Millennia existed
with a huge amount of honey and refined
carbs so sugar we can handle although we
should reduce our intake sweeteners are
quite weird because they're a
nutritional lie you put sweet taste on
the tongue which says to your body sugar
is coming so maybe put up some insulin
maybe um start preparing in other ways
physiologically to receive refined
carbohydrate and when that refined
carbohydrate when the sugar never
arrives it seems to be physiologically
confusing so the World Health
Organization now says sweeteners aren't
better than sugar when it comes to
weight loss and there is there is an
anxiety about aspartam and cancer that
I'm I'm personally not not in a big
sweat about there's some there's some
evidence but not not at normal dosage
then we've got natural flavorings we've
got caffeine flavoring an addictive drug
and phosphoric acid and citric acid
natural it said natural flavorings I
mean you know that's good well
flavorings are flavorings flavorings
should signal nutritional content when
you eat a tomato it has flavor not for
fun it has flavor because it signals the
nutritional content of the Tomato when
you put flavorings out of context e even
if you extract them from the tomato or
the strawberry or the peach it's very
confusing for you phys biologically
you've you have a very sophisticated
internal system to link flavor molecules
which are broadly smell and taste
molecules salt Sweet Bitter sour and
some Savory ones you you your body has a
way of linking all that information with
nutritional information that you get
from your gut subconsciously when you
muddle it all up in a product like this
it's very confusing the phosphoric acid
will dissolve the minerals out of your
bones as well as dissolving your teeth
so what we have here is a solution of
flavorings an addictive drug an acid
that will Lee stuff out of your bones
and sweeteners that seem to be
metabolically confusing and certainly
aren't better than sugar and yet we
think of this as a health product so
that for me is the archetypal confused
way of thinking about food I um and what
we also know is that when it comes to
kids the age of my youngest so the age
of three they are drinking on average
one can of artificially sweetened drinks
every single day so we've we've taxed
sugar sugar has come out of our diet
we've seen no weight loss no indication
that it's helping health and what we are
doing is consuming huge numbers now of
these artificial sweetness which we also
know affect our microbiome what is a a
better alternative that's popular on on
the market than because it appears to me
that all of the drinks in the bloody
Supermarket have artificial sweeteners
and flavorings and they do because of
the sugar tax so it's almost impossible
now to buy fizzy tax without sweeten to
to buy fizzy
without sweetness um bet so for kids I
try and not give any advice to anyone
ever but my
kids um my kids eat a lot of UPF but
they don't have fizzy drinks I think I
think fizzy drinks are really quite
harmful across the board so so kids
should just drink milk and water milk if
they can have it and
grown-ups um can do pretty well on milk
and water if you drink milk what about
breakfast cereals and Cheerios and
things like that so breakfast cereals
are really convenient I mean let me see
the Cheerios so I think
these uh so these these probably do meet
the def yeah these do meet the
definition oh they are yeah so we've got
things like um uh palm oil caramelized
sugar syrup uh colors and Aton noxin and
an antioxidant and so this is ultr
processed it'll have some Fiber you'll
have it with whole milk I don't want to
demonize breakfast cereals my kids eat
eat uh breakfast cereals for breakfast
but it's not like eating porridge which
is just whole grains or real bread this
is this is and what you will find is if
you give this to a kid um compared to
porridges they will be able to eat much
much more of this and there is there's a
lot of marketing that this is a really
really healthy product and I would say
the evidence says that this falls into a
cat category of foods that we actually
know are associated with negative Health
outcomes it says on the side there
doesn't it the list of all the health
benefits a really good way of telling if
a food is ultr processed is if there is
any health claim on the packet it's
almost certainly ultr processed and part
of that is to do with this intellectual
property thing that the only food you
can make lots of money out of is is a
branded product so there's no money in
broccoli milk steak eggs um supermarkets
quite often make losses on all those
things there's no heal claim on broccoli
or on plums or on milk there's no Health
claim on on steak it's only the ultra
process things that you get marketed to
you in this way because there's enough
money to do it the acl's interesting as
well the immune support well it says
immune support and it says vitamin D and
B6 so that rich in Vitamin D immune
support that is definitely
healthy I mean this is this is a
this is where we need we we we should
have done the maths and shown how much
sugar there was in each pot these are
very high calor shots of sugary liquid
that will harm teeth and I don't know
why you'd have this if you could just
have real yogurt and or
milk and the reason they back add the
vitamins is to be able to make Health
claims so generally foods with added
vitamins um real food doesn't need added
vitamins and we're again we're pretty
sure
that and I'm I'm conscious who I'm
talking to here I've got to I'm I'm uh
uh uh I probably have to tread a bit
carefully supplementing vitamins into
food doesn't seem to have many health
benefits for healthy people so we've got
quite a lot of very big data on this um
and there are lots of studies that show
benefits that are funded by people who
make vitamins but broadly the
independent evidence shows that um when
you get vitamins and minerals in the
context of food they're really good for
you and when you take them in pill or
supplement form they don't seem to have
many benefits if you are healthy and
this food here this bottle of coke I've
got can of Pringles and uh cocoa pops
Kellogg cereal this is the stuff that I
typically think of as like bad processed
Ultra processed stay away from you would
but give me the cocoa pops so the cocoa
pops we look at these traffic lights
okay green green orange orange pretty
healthy I mean there is a there is a
monkey on the pack selling it to my to
my kids yeah it says high in vitamin
high in fiber vitamin D iron yeah iron
supporting your family's health right s
goodness I mean everything about this
tells you that this is a product not
just safe for kids but intended for kids
and we all know you like you can't sell
things if they're not healthy there must
be some regulat dealing with that and
this is the thing that my six-year-old
will eat five adult portions of so when
you eat five adult portions the the the
traffic lights only apply to a 30 G
serving for you now a 30 G serving is is
a handful like that it's it's one big
spoonful okay so this is the product
that I I recognize addictive behavior in
my kids and frankly myself I mean I
could eat you know 300 grams but and the
other thing that I I went and got from
the supermarket because I was thinking
about what I typically think is ultra
processed and good for me I went and got
this
frozen pizza here and then I went and
got a Tesco finer so this is high-end
you know much more expensive not frozen
pizza and I thought surely this pizza
here is better for a lot better for me
than this one
here so again that there's a complexity
talking about is one better than the
other because we've we've never done a
trial testing them against each other
they're both Ultra processed I know
because I looked at the ingredients they
both contain ingredients that you don't
have in a domestic kitchen like um Palm
fat or dextrose um and they're both made
really in a sense by the same company so
both of they're both made by plc's who
will be owned by institutional investors
with requirements for growth so they
come from the same food system with the
same incentives about production and my
bet is that you or I would be able to
eat the entire pizza at a single sitting
um and we'd be still licking the pack of
both of them so this is food that in
essens is is engineered to be consumed
to
excess you did an experiment didn't you
quite a famous experiment now where you
put yourself on an ultr processed food
diet can you tell me about that
experiment and the symptoms that you saw
when you did lived off Ultra processed
food pretty much
exclusively so I I ate a diet that's
very normal for a British teenager I ate
80% of my calories from Ultra processed
food so for for a teenager in in you
know the my kid school for example that
this would be a completely normal thing
to do one in five people in this country
get 80% of their calories from UPF so I
wasn't really putting my body on the
line um I was switching from 20% to 80%
um kind of two really big things
happened there was some health effects
so um in terms of the physical effects
on my body I gained so much weight and I
wasn't it wasn't supersizing me I wasn't
forcing it in this was done as part of a
um a scientific experiment for a big
study that I'm now running at at
University College London where I where
I work as an
academic I gained so much weight that in
if I'd continued for a year I would have
doubled my body
weight we scanned my brain before and
after I work with colleagues at the
National Hospital for neurology and
Neuroscience so neurology and
neurosurgery so this these were scans
done very expertly and while I'm only
one patient you can you can subtract the
noise you can be very sure that what you
see is real we saw enormous in increases
in connectivity be between the the
automatic Behavior habit bits the back
of the brain and those reward addiction
bits right in the middle of the brain so
we can't exactly say what's happening
but certainly behaviors and rewards are
getting much much more connected most
significantly I think we saw a change in
my hormonal response to a meal so when
you eat real
food whilst you're eating you're chewing
all kinds of hormonal and neurological
changes happen in your body that will
come to a point they'll say look you've
had enough Stephen you're fine you can
stop eating now and that's called
satiety and we've evolved this mechanism
since living things first started eating
food hundreds of millions of years ago
and uh all animals have it and humans
have it too what we saw is that the at
the end of a standard meal at the end of
this month my hunger hormones remained
Skyhigh so this is food that is
interfering with our body's evolved
mechanisms to say I am done it's time to
stop eating but there was there was this
other thing that happened kind of the
most important thing and it's at the
core of the book is that Midway through
this diet which I was quite enjoying you
know if you're if you're a sort of
middle-aged man trying to you know the
quest is always to lose lose weight and
I could go back to eating the foods of
my childhood and I was eating hot wings
and all this stuff that I hadn't eaten
for years I was really enjoying it but I
was also doing all this research partly
for the book and I'm you know as a
scientist I study nutrition and uh I was
talking to a colleague in Brazil called
Fernanda rbert and she just kept saying
this isn't food Chris it's an
industrially produced edible substance
and I sat down that evening to meet eat
a a meal of of takeaway fried chicken
and I I could hardly finish it and she
had flicked this switch in my brain
where all of this ultrapress food had
become disgusting but I then had to keep
eating it for another fortnite and so it
was a bit like the very famous book the
easy way to quit smoking where you smoke
all the way through reading the book
while you learn about smoking and by the
end of the diet I I I mean I now don't
want to eat any ultr processed products
so the the gift I'm trying to give the
reader is if you're living with
addiction my invitation at the beginning
is eat along eat while you read don't
forbid this stuff to yourself let
yourself wallow in it immerse it taste
it and you'll start to and read the
ingredients lists while you eat and
you'll realize that all the food is has
the same flavor profile it's all equally
salty and sugary and sweet it's all
acidic um and you will gradually become
disgusted and that's not a promise that
seems to be what's happening to a lot of
people and that is a very well-evidenced
technique when it comes to living with
addiction so the World Health
Organization who I work with recommends
the easy way to quit smoking for
quitting smoking uh as as being as
useful as patches or any other technique
so I'm For The Individual treating it as
an addictive substance may be really
useful for some people what was the
impact on your sort of mental health and
how you felt from a sort of psychology
perspective because I you know we've
seen this huge rise in sort of mental
health diagnosis across the board
especially in younger younger people but
it seems to be pretty consistent
throughout different ages and
demographics and I wondered if there's a
link between ultra-processed foods and
Mental Health crisis that we're living
through we've got really good
epidemiological data so we now have
hundreds of perspective studies which
are the best the kind of studies we use
to link smoking to to cancer that it is
not just associated with physical ill
health metabolic disease inflammatory
disease cardiovascular disease cancers
early death it's all also associated
with anxiety depression and also
dementia and um my experience of being
on the diet was that
um there was a there was a there was a
thing that I think the research doesn't
capture which is because it's salty I
was getting up to pee more at night and
I was I don't know if I can say this I
was getting really constipated and
uncomfortable because it's quite low in
fiber and so I got in this vicious cycle
of sleeplessness and I'd often find
myself where at the fridge in the kind
of small hour at the morning and the
food felt like the solution to the
problem so I got in this spiral of
sleeplessness anxiety overeating and we
know that stress and elevated cortisol
also generally increases your desire for
for low quality food and makes people
overeat so in a way that kind of
middle-aged stress anxiety the sort of
mild mental health symptoms that so many
people live with often it is just driven
by by the food I read this um stat in
your book according to the world's
obesity Federation 51% of the world or
more than 4 billion people will be obese
or overweight within the next 12 years
so I like to say they will live with
obesity um rather than the rather than
use obese as an adjective because I
think the biggest problem for people who
live with obesity is stigma it's that
being obese is your identity and what we
actually know is that the the world OBC
Federation are doing some really good
work work identifying this as the major
public health problem the ticklishness
talking about this is it's really hard
to say that obesity is a problem without
also saying that people who live with it
are the problem and if you're not
careful a war on Obesity becomes a war
on people who live with it and I think
the evidence is very clear it's just
about the food environment so yes you
can make these very powerful economic
arguments that we simply cannot afford
to have a food system that's driving
this rate of disease
um I think the moral arguments are much
more powerful that this is stuff that
causes human suffering so I I would not
actually tax Ultra processed food and I
certainly wouldn't ban it I think all my
arguments are about increasing Freedom
increasing Choice increasing opportunity
and that's quite conscious I mean you
you know this as a as a skillful
Communicator you talk about kind of
doing exactly this in your book where
I'm trying to make an argument that will
appeal to the political right that are
much more on the side of of uh you know
free market low regulation and in fact
we can have regulations completely
compatible with huge economic growth and
what I'm asking for is a food system
where people with low incomes have
access to healthy affordable
food because a lot of people would say
and this is sort of part two of your
book that okay so the solution here is
really just for people to make better
choices when they're I don't know in
their fridges or when they're walking
through a supermarket why don't we just
all make better choices I mean you you
will you may have a much more profound I
I think you're asking this question in a
provocative way I think you will
understand it much better than me I've
always had choice and so when I choose
to buy things I that are unhealthy it is
with a degree of choice I do my my
patients um I run a clinic at the
hospital for tropical disease where I
work and most of my patients have no
addresses they're very disadvantaged
they're migrants Asylum Seekers um they
come from very low-income families
because those are the people who get
infections now when I say to them go and
eat some healthy food they all know what
healthy food is they've often got very
they very diverse community' got very
rich traditions of healthy food from the
the communities of the cultures they've
come from they are completely unable to
buy it in the case of the Asylum Seekers
they're on 8 pound a day and they can't
work you can't you can't say to someone
on spend your eight pound a day on
apples and broccoli and me they haven't
got knives to cut it with now we know a
million households in this country don't
have fridges freezers stove top cookers
so there are a huge number of families
that only have a microwave to cook and
fresh food while there is always a
politician willing to advance this
argument like you can buy a bag of
lentils if you go to the cash and
carryer you can buy rice or lentils for
you know a couple of quid for 10 kilos
it costs money to heat it it cost time
time is the most expensive thing for for
people with low incomes they need pots
pans cutting boards knives Tupperware if
you're going to batch cook which is the
only way to make home cooking economical
you got a deep freezer to store it in so
saying to people with low incomes you
know make healthier choices it is it is
nonsense it's just it's it's and so I
feel very strongly it the world does not
need another person like me saying that
and in fact no one I mean we all people
hate being told what to do there was a
study done on toddlers in 1920 that you
write about which is quite Illuminating
where they got to choose their own food
from a selection of un unprocessed foods
and the children instinctively chose
their own diet which met their
nutritional needs and Cal calorie
intake what was that experiment and what
does that indicate to us about the
nature of this argument what as it
relates to just being able to control
what we and choose what we
want if we look at the animal kingdom
even if you look at something you might
think has quite a simple diet like a
like a big herbivore living in you know
any of the big herbivores living on any
of the big PLS of the world and you
think well they just eat grass they
don't we've done loads of experiments
where you put sounds a bit unkind but
you put a hole in the neck of the animal
and you put a bag on the hole and you
collect the plants they're eating and
you can do this in a way that's
relatively Humane and what we discover
is if we study goats or cows they're
eating 50 or 60 different plants a day
calories are abundant and what those
animals are doing is balancing all their
nutrition needs from all those different
plants and selecting them and learning
them about the flavor profile and the
mineral content they're moving to avoid
predators in the rains to different
soils so animals are incredibly
sophisticated at at perfectly balancing
their nutritional needs from their
environment and obesity is uh
non-existent in the wild animal kingdom
in urban animals actually that start to
scavenge from humans there is some
evidence of obesity but in wild animals
there is there is no obesity humans
turns out obviously have the same
ability and so a scientist called uh
claraa Davis who's amazing woman she was
she was a a gay woman uh one of the
first medical graduates in in North
America and she did this experiment
where she was she was taking abandoned
kids in ENT she was functioned almost
like an orphanage and each child got
access to 34 different Whole Foods every
single day and it was things like there
was raw bone marrow and cooked rice and
yogurt and milk and they had a little
bowl of salt they could have as much or
as little salt as they wanted and her
question was could the kids balance
their nutritional needs and the best
example was a kid called Earl who she uh
took in a few months old and he came in
with Ricket so he had very bad vitamin D
deficiency had bendy bones and they did
some X-rays and you could see the
rickets on the x-rays and every single
day he would glug an entire cup of cod
liver oil which at the time was one of
the only really the only source of
vitamin D and he drink this every single
day enthus I asically he always wanted
his codli Roy and on the day his rickets
were healed and you couldn't see them
anymore on the x-rays he stopped
drinking the cod liver oil never asked
for it again and none of the kids
without vitamin D deficiency would drink
would touch the cod liver oil so
something in Earl's body was saying I
will when I need this stuff I'll have it
once I don't need it anymore I won't
have any more of it and all the kids
that she studied over many many years
with access to a full range of foods
perfectly matched all their nutritional
leads they all grew really well they
were intellectually welldeveloped they
extremely healthy and they didn't have
any of the sort of food refusal problems
that that parents have nowadays so and
she knew very well that the point was
the kids only had access to good food
she wasn't giving them access to um
industrially processed junk foods which
were still slightly available in in the
20s it was a really cool experiment for
me I take away from that that our bodies
can kind of self regulate what we need
if they're in an environment where the
options are good so if I'm a parent and
I'm sure I'll be a parent in the next
couple of years I hope so um if I just
make sure in my house all the food
options are good for my kids Whole Foods
all the good stuff you've described
presumably then I can just unlock the
cupboards and let them run free I love
talking
to um people who might become parents
about what they think I mean like wow
you just I mean yeah good good luck to
you let's can we have this conversation
again in about six years can you tell me
why I'm you're not wrong you're
completely right it will be impossible
for you to limit the influx of ultra
processed food into your house so
clearly I've written a book on this I
study this I would love to do that I
want my kids to be normal being normal
is really important as a kid and food
isn't just stuff we put in to build our
bodies food binds us to the people
around us food is part of our community
and our culture in the UK our food
culture is ultr processed food and if
you don't eat and drink Ultra processed
food you become a slightly odd person
and so I still eat it when I go to
friends houses because otherwise I look
like some you know uh fanatical food
snob so and it's the same with my kids
so so uh grandparents friends relatives
all bring it round you don't control
what they eat at school um you know my
youngest ones a really nice Nursery but
still ultrapress food food from uh from
the minute she gets there to to when she
leaves so um very good luck to you but
this is why I argue I I nod to if an
individual wants to read my book I think
they will come away with technical
knowledge that they will be able to use
and and I wish them well with that the
big argument of the book is about this
this is about social justice you know it
is it is really appalling that even for
people with with a lot of means real
food is incredibly affordable and
unavailable as you guys may know this
podcast is sponsored by one of my
favorite brands in all the world which
is whoop AI is a topic I've spoken about
various times on this podcast and it's a
topic that I'm pretty obsessed with but
we don't often talk about how it could
be used as a force to make our lives
even better whoop is using the power of
AI to drive meaningful positive change
my whoop doesn't leave my wrist and
their new feature which is called whoop
coach uses the power of advanced AI to
synthesize all of your health and
fitness data and to provide you with
personalized recommendations to support
you on your health and fitness journey
you can literally ask it questions like
why am I so tired or can you help me
build a strength training program and
its Advanced AI system will provide you
with answers that are unique to you so
if you would like to check it out and
level up your health and fitness journey
in the process go to join. whoop.com
SL CEO to get a free months whoop
membership as you'll know this podcast
is sponsored by hu and one of my
favorite products that they've ever
created is their hu Daily Greens it
actually performed so well when we
released it that it sold out completely
and the only thing I'm back here to say
to you guys is that it's now back in
stock it tastes amazing and it's
actually got 91 vitamins and minerals
and whole food ingredients in one scoop
it's nice not to have to think about
taking lots of different pills and
vitamins in the morning I can just take
this and I know that I'm giving my body
a good dose of all the vitamins and
minerals that it needs every morning
it's a lot better tasting than having to
force down some of the other green
powders I've tried and it's really
reassuring to know that I'm looking
after my body properly unfortunately and
currently this product is only available
in the US so anyone in the USA head to
hu.com to get it before it runs out
again but anyone that's not in the US
and wants it to come to their country
please send me a DM a direct message and
I'll speak to the team at hu in our
board meetings and I'll let them know
that you want it in your country what
about the people that say this is just
about calories in calorie out the you
know Fitness Community lot of the weight
loss Community just say what you've got
to do and I've actually got a friend
that said this to me quite passionately
he says what I do is I just measure the
amount of calories I'm taking in measure
the calories that are coming out and I
make sure that there's a calorie deficit
and if you have a calorie deficit he
actually said to me one day he goes you
can eat whatever you want and you'll be
fine mathematically he's he's not
entirely
wrong that there are there are some very
very there are two very very big
problems with that the first is that
while some people can just eat to
instructions many of us have genes that
uh lead us to engage with food in a more
interesting way you know I care about
food I love food I'm driven to it so you
your friend should come around my house
in the morning with a box of cocoa pops
and try and get my daughter to eat one
adult portion and good luck to him I
mean they'll be screaming and crying and
she'll be grabbing the bo
so the food it's a bit like saying to
smokers all you have to do is just smoke
one cigarette don't smoke the whole pack
just have like one to be social or
people who live with addiction to
alcohol well just have one drink and
that won't do you any harm the the food
really is addictive for many people but
there is this other bit of the equation
which is really fascinating which is
that when we do more activity of the
kind that most of us do it doesn't seem
to have an enormous impact on the
calories that we burn and this is very
very good robust sence going back to the
going back to the '90s
um the the most if I tell this as a
story which I think it's the way you'd
do it um there was a scientist called
Herman poner and he wanted to know how
many more calories he'd burn if he went
and lived as a hunter gatherer with the
hadza tribe in Tanzania so he went and
studied them and he put He used a thing
called double labeled water where you
can measure very accurately calorie
expenditure and he put them in metabolic
hoods and he studied them for months and
months and he came back and he looked
looked at his data and he thought he'
got it all wrong because the data showed
that for um essentially if you or I went
and lived in Tanzania and we walked 15
kilometers a day hunting Antelope and
digging tubers out of the ground we
wouldn't burn any more calories per day
and he just could not make sense of this
so then he went back and looked at all
the data available in the literature
we've studied animals we've studied
different human populations there are um
we've studied subsistence Farmers
compared to secretarial workers in the
states we've looked at miners the same
thing is true in all the studies when
you do sustained activity over a long
period it doesn't massively impact your
calories now some exceptions if you do
polar expiration if you cycle in the tur
France if you go to the gym for an hour
and a half every day six days a week you
probably do burn a few more calories but
activity of the kind we all do doesn't
seem to and that explains why exercise
is good for us because if you don't do
exercise I burn 3,000 calories a day
rough let's say we slightly different
body compositions but roughly you and I
burn 3,000 calories a day if you do your
hour and a half of exercise every day
you're stealing energy from your other
budgets you're taking it away from
inflammation away from hormones and away
from anxiety and that's why exercise
seems to be good for us because I'm
sitting here and I'm ready to live said
said and TR with my two kids I don't go
to the gym for an hour a day so I spend
my calories but they're spent on
inflammation and anxiety and relatively
High hormone levels and is this what we
call the fixed energy model I read that
in your book that term yeah so that's
that's um that's that's the model and
there are lots of exceptions um but what
that model tells us along with all the
other available data is that when we are
talking about populations who live with
obesity increasing activity will be
really good for them but it will not
have a significant effect on body weight
so when we're talking about the pandemic
of obesity um activity isn't hugely
important and if people are listening
and they want to lose weight many people
have the experience that
um putting a healthy diet in the context
of lots of other healthy things is often
really a good way of bringing about
behavioral change you'll feel good in
other ways but the activity in the
exercise if you think that putting in
your slog at the gym every most of us
can manage 40 minutes every other day
tops and I I get nowhere near that it's
not going to have an impact on your
weekly calories e even if even if we
accepted that the even if we did think
that it increased the number of calories
you burn there's other evidence that
says you you either eat more because
your your body isn't just the
mathematical uh machine that your your
friend proposes um but also it's if you
add up the calories and you go to the
gym for half an hour four times a week
it's just not very many calories in
terms of your weekly calories unless
even if you're cycling as hard as you
can for the whole thing I can I can
definitely relate I I work out every day
because just because I if I didn't you
do it every day you set you seven days a
week I have PT every single day and the
reason I do that is purely because I am
best disciplined when I have a clear
routine so knowing that it's part of my
habit and that it's actually today it's
in my calendar yesterday it was in my
calendar even I even have lunch in my
calendar now because I'm just trying to
make sure that I have some kind of
routine um with my with my eating or
else I just won't eat I remember on
Friday I my first meal was at 600 p.m.
because I was podcasting had some stuff
with the BBC and I don't want to do I
don't want to eat before I do anything
because my I'll slump my point here
though is with my personal trainer every
day if I don't change my diet very
little happens with my body I actually I
end up growing a bit more muscles I end
up getting a bit stronger but in terms
of weight loss the fast it just sits
there yeah interestingly though from a
psychology perspective I've spoken to a
lot of scientists and doctors who have
said your body will basically
overcompensate for what you've just
burned if you went go for a five or 10
mile run your body wants to defend its
weight because that's defending its
survival chances for me one of the
things that happens is if I go out go
and work out in the gym because it was
so painful I'll then come home and look
at the flapjack or the cookie whatever
and I'll think that's two steps
backwards that's interesting whereas
some people will come home look at the
flapjack and go I've earned that but to
counteract my own point that also
happens sometimes I go well I can have
it because I just ran or whatever um
what I what I might do is I might avoid
the flapjack the obviously bad thing but
then I might eat more of something that
I think isn't bad you see what I'm
saying you'll have a sort of nutritional
bar or something that is sold to you as
being part of that kind of accer yeah
and I'll eat four of those and when you
speak to one of the really interesting
things is when you speak to
nutritionists and I've spoken to a
couple who work with really Elite Sports
Teams um those athletes generally eat
food so they that they have chefs that
make and they might make quite an
elaborate Flapjack but it will be a
flapjack made with the ingredients you
would have in your kitchen and they will
often drink milk while they're cycling
or running and they'll eat pieces of
chicken rather than other things this
topic of willpower again we kind of
started with it I love because willpower
comes up a lot in your stuff and it's
been so interesting listening to your
your stuff about it yeah I have to be
honest I have evolved in my thinking
about it because I've listened to both
sides of the argument around will power
and it does appear to me that there is
probably something else going going on
but with all these studies on Willpower
it's hard to establish causation because
there are other factors that are quite
clearly could confound the variables in
play so it's something that I've gone
back and forward on you talk about twin
studies in the context of willp power
and what that can teach us why did why
did you talk about twin studies in
chapter nine part of it was done by a
colleague called CL lellan and um what
CLA was looking at was the her this it's
a bit convoluted let me see if I can do
this the heritability of obesity genes
so there's a weird thing we see this
with with um it's bit easy to understand
with IQ but it's it's true of IQ genes
and obesity genes that in some places if
your parents have genes for obesity you
will have a 90% chance of inheriting the
Obesity but in other families it's more
like 10% same is true with with IQ so um
what CLA lellan showed was that if you
came from a situation of deprivation if
you came from a low-income household
your genes for obesity are much more
likely to be expressed so you would
inherit those you'd inherit those genes
and you would develop obesity now the
the social importance of this was
because IQ studies originally showed
that intelligence was hereditary and
this caused huge problems because um it
was done in the states and uh minority
groups were measured as having lower in
elligence and this provided that kind of
core argument of saying well some people
are genetically less intelligent and
there's a woman called Sandra Scar and
she did the first intelligence first
studies and it was twin studies that
showed it were that um whilst
intelligence is heritable in some
communities it isn't in others and
basically it works like this if you come
from a well-off household all your genes
whether they're for a healthy body shape
or for intelligence they're all maxed
out and so you all the variability is
genetic in the population if you come
from a low-income household you might
have genes for height that never get
expressed you might have genes for
intelligence that because you have been
poorly nourished you haven't been as
educated as well those genes for
intelligence never get expressed so you
have a really complicated picture where
genes can be inherited but not expressed
in different communities according to
how those populations are treated and so
that's one of the crucial things in
Psychology is when only study white
middleclass populations when we only
study psychology students we get very
very different answers to when we go and
look at populations who live with
disadvantage or low income so
essentially what one of the big findings
from clell's work is if you got rid of
poverty uh you would get rid of around
60% of the problem of diet related
disease and you and your brother because
you are
twins are quite a good example of this I
guess because you reference how he went
and lived in Boston and was having a
stressful time and gained weight I mean
every time I go to America we we travel
out there to record the podcast it's
just absolutely [__] wild like we I
just feel terrible um I I always gain
weight um I un avoid if you're doing
work like you do in the states and
you're you're at hotels and you're on
the move and you're traveling you you
cannot eat good food that mini bar in
the bloody hotel which they just keep
topping up I remember I was saying to
the team I was like I put the cookies in
the [__] bin and then I came back the
next day and they' put two bags there
like yeah they think you've eaten the
cookie yeah they thought I enjoyed them
I mean the marketing that's a form of
marketing and if you think that you are
struggling I'll come back to Boston but
if you think that someone like you
struggles in a hotel room when they've
put cookies and all this junk there and
you have to sort of put it out of sight
for a British teenager this is true for
teenagers in States Canada Australia
they are saturated in marketing in a way
that you would be completely invisible
to you and I it's I mean you you may
remember this from childhood it's on
your bus tickets when you buy stationary
at the shop it'll be on your receip it's
on your music apps because we pay for
our music apps but kids don't it's on
their social media um the companies get
their phone numbers directly uh from
they enter competitions and then they
send them meal deals and messages ping
ping ping to their phones so they it's
360 247 immersion in marketing of
addicted products and so it's it's not
that confusing why 25% of British kids
live with obesity not just overweight
anyway so Boston yeah my twin my twin
moved to Boston it was a situation of
some stress he'd had a a kid um uh a son
Julian uh with someone in a way that
that wasn't planned I suppose Julian
knows this uh I mean Julian's the whole
it's all part of a very dear family now
um but it was very stressful he went
there to do a master's degree he lived
above a burger shop and he he kind of
ate his problems and he he gained 30
kilos and that that is an example of we
both have a genetic vulnerability but my
life in the UK was very stable and I was
in a different food environment in the
UK you move my genes my clone
genetically we're identical you move my
clone to the states stress him out a bit
he gains 30 kilos I mean it's it's
nothing and oh has our willpower changed
has our personal responsibility changed
you know a set of um accidents and and
uh uh coincidences and the food
environment are what determine his
weight has nothing to do with willpower
at all whenever I feel like I'm in a
situation where I don't have autonomy
and control I'm like G and when I hear
about this sort of food environment
we're living in and the the big food
Mafia and the marketing and pinging me
left right and center and all the
products that are in some of these ultr
processed foods that are making me feel
addicted to them that I just it's just
triggering my my brain in a in a way
that I can't seem to control either I go
I want to be able to do something about
it on an individual level I want to be
able to take back control without having
to wait for bloody Downing Street or the
White House to change things I love that
and what what I try and propose in the
book is that you need to make that
Journey probably when you start reading
the book you're you're in this sort of
unconscious stage if you don't think of
yourself as either a victim or anything
you're just eating your food and then
Midway through the B book I think I do
propose to you that you are a victim and
that's a hard thing for any of us to
listen to most of us don't want to be
victims and I think you have to make the
journey from victim to activist pretty
quickly and you can be an activist in
your own life for yourself and you can
if you have resources and money and
skills you you can get rid of ultra
processed food lots of people actually
can't I just I just got to be really
blunt here like there is there is an
anxiety I had write in this book that um
for the core audience of readers who can
afford books most of them will be able
to buy sourdough from a fancy Bakery
rather than you know the Loa of PR we
just looked at but for the people who
are most affected by the problem that it
simply won't be a choice for someone
like you yes you you need to take that
kind of emotional reaction and turn it
into um direct that rage rather than
than directing it inwards it's directing
it out to a food system that controls
you I mean one of the one of the
political narratives we hear is is is
that any kind of Regulation is Nanny
statism it's about government overreach
at the moment we live in a nanny State
the nannying is done by transnational
food corporations they don't pay any
particular tax in this country they're
you know they do employ some people but
these these are not companies that are
part of our sort of culture and yet they
are controlling our our food and what we
eat and I think we need to rest a little
bit of control back off those of th of
those companies but that group of people
that maybe weren't the majority of
people you were speaking to with your
book that
don't have the privilege that me and you
have to make better choices as it
relates to food or to um buy the pots
and pans and chopping boards or get a
chef to cook it for us whatever what you
say to them what do they do I mean this
is why I don't give advice because there
is there we are at this moment where we
do have to politically treat the
companies like the tobacco companies now
at the moment for many people trying to
quit ultr processed food will be like
trying to quit smoking in the 1960s is
it really addictive so the do you want
me to do a bit on the the evidence for
addiction so the the the the definition
of adct because people food addiction
has been really scientifically complex
for a long time because baked into the
notion of addiction is that the only
strategy that ever works is abstinence
you cannot be adct abstinent from food
and so food can't be addictive so for a
long time we said well food is a
behavioral addiction where it is the the
food Behavior not the food itself the
definition of Ultra processed food
allows you to describe the category of
substances that are addictive and when
we go and speak to people who say I live
with addiction to food and you say what
do what do you feel addicted to It's
Always ultra processed product it'll be
very different some people it's going to
be the diet colors some people it's
Biscuits some people it's pizzas but
it's always UPF um the definition of
addiction is continued use of a
substance despite knowledge of harms
physical or psychological and despite
repeated attempts to quit and you and I
will both know people in our own lives
who continue to uh eat this food I mean
I was definitely one of these people uh
despite knowing it was harming me and
wanting to stop eating it so that's why
I think I have two groups of readers
some people are just going to want to
cut down you you might be someone who's
maybe eating a little bit more than you
want and you just want to go I'm going
to maximize my health and I'm just going
to I'm going to have it as a treat on a
Friday night and that's fine it's like
it can be like booze or or the
occasional
cigarette for some people that one
cigarette that one glass of wine for for
many probably 40% of people I don't know
about your audience but across the
country 40% of people will have a
troubled relationship with it and for
those people abstinence may be a an
easier strategy so yeah I think it's
addictive when we look at scans it's
addictive when we do surveys it's
addictive when we um look at the profile
of genes and the other um surrounding
factors that lead to addiction it's
caused by the same things and there's
lots of basic science about um the the
speed of consumption and addiction so
addictive things are normally very
quickly consumed shots crystal meth um
tobacco products if you chew tobacco if
you have slow release methylphenidate
it's a treatment for ADHD it's not
addictive um if you have weak session
beer it's not addictive like tequila
shots are so the speed of hit seems to
be important and that may be partly to
do with the softness of UPF you get a
you get a very quick hit of your
nutrition is there a link between ultr
processed foods and
neurodiversity you know
ADHD those kinds of things because
there's some emerging evidence about
ADHD I'm speaking to um there's a
working group at the Royal College of
psychiatrists who are really interested
in the links between uh binge eating
disorders and other eating disorders and
um and ultr processed food um I think we
we are only at the very beginning of
discovering the health effects but
remember from from very early on in
childhood a huge number of kids in this
country are on a diet of ultra almost
pure Ultra processed food but that's
often in a situation where there is also
other sources of um trauma of um
there'll be other health factors
there'll be poor housing um it will go
hand inand with lots of other things so
as an adjunct to other other problems I
would think there will be a link but
teasing it all out is going to be
complicated a high UPF diet is linked to
More Death glob than tobacco high blood
pressure or any other health risk 22% of
all deaths that's a stat I got from your
book and also increased consumption of
UPF Ultra processed foods is linked to
the following diseases all cause
mortality cardiovascular disease cancers
high blood presses fatty liver disease
in inflammatory bowel disease depression
worse blood fat profile irritable bowel
syndrome dementia and I can't even say
that other one F Frailty Frailty just
fertility being weak and
old CH part five of your book is what am
I supposed to do about it and I've kind
of answered it I want to make sure I'm
really clear of my own life here I can
because I have the privilege of doing so
I can make better food choices the first
part of it is awareness knowing what
Ultra processed foods are and I believe
I've got that definition from you step
two is I really need to do an audit of
the things that I'm consuming frequently
to make sure that I'm at least
intentional about my consumption of
ultra processed foods and then I can
make better choices to bring in more
Whole Foods into my into my diet um
because you're right there's so many
things that I'm consuming that I thought
were good for me I mean I I drank bloody
orange juice for [__] Sunny D for 20
years because I just thought it was
great for me vitamin D or something I
can't remember so Sunny yeah exactly and
it was it was marketed at me um
awareness is step one making making more
informed choices I guess is step two for
me
um and then there's a broader point
which is about trying to change the
system for
others which I I can do by having these
kind of conversations I
guess I love that th those steps are
coming from you that I I don't have a I
I honestly don't care what people eat I
I like freedom I don't like being told
what to do and so I am not prescriptive
about what anyone should eat nowhere in
the book do I say you should like as a
normative statement you should eat less
up F so if you want to knowing what you
know that's up to you I don't think
anyone has a duty to be healthy to
generate economic growth I just think no
one asked to be born you're born you
should be able to live your life as you
want what I do think is what I want for
for
everyone is that they can they have
agency so that they are not subject to
constant predatory marketing and they
have true choice so all the policies
that proposing and I'm part of a big
group working on this are about making
real food affordable and available so in
terms of the the hierarchy of what needs
to be done for everyone the number one
thing is tackle poverty poverty is a
political Choice there is enormous
wealth in this country and uh and people
born into disadvantage should not have a
different
childhood than people who are born rich
and and and it feels kind of almost
revolutionary to say that but it's
really obvious to me like what why I
mean I can talk about this all day but
but Health outcomes are so different for
people born in poverty for people who
live across the road from from from my
kids so that's the number one thing the
second thing is um some very light
regulation I don't want to tax things I
don't want to ban things we need to
appropriately label unhealthy food and
at the moment the labels are so
confusing as to be unusable we need to
put in our national nutrition guidance
that there is good evidence linking
processed food as a category to all
these poor health outcomes and we should
recommend uh the government should
recommend that people do try and consume
less now there will be a real problem
for the government doing that because
the government creates a food
environment and it's really hard for a
government to say look on the one hand
don't eat all this and they go on the
other hand that is all you can afford to
eat so that's going to create a real
political problem and that's sort of
what we're up against um the most
important policy step is to get industry
out of the room when it comes to making
policy so this is so the I just spoke at
the world of obesity Federation in New
York um they're a un aligned who aligned
group outside of the UK there is no
discussion about the role of ultra
processed food that pandemic obesity is
primarily due to this Western industrial
diet everyone agrees on this countries
like Argentina a can of cola has three
big black hexagons on it bigger than the
logo of the company that makes the cola
same with most of the breakfast cereals
you know there are warnings in the
National Garden so globally people are
very very aware of this in the UK um
there is real control of the public
health n narrative by the by the food
and drink industry so as an example all
our major Charities that influence
policy and a lot of policy comes from
charity they're all paid by companies
that make by UPF so if we look at the
British nutrition Foundation it is
majority funded by all the major food
companies you can name Coca-Cola Nestle
Cargill all of them um cancer research
UK diabetes UK the British dietetic
Association all of them are funded by
companies that make ultr processed food
so we need we need to start treating the
companies like the tobacco industry and
saying no no your money is is not good
and we won't take it because it
influences food policy that's kind of
the most important step and so part of
being an activist in this area for me is
um not taking food industry money myself
and so that that is a very painful
weekly process because if you write a
book about food you get offered you know
I mean enormous amounts of money to go
and to go and work for the food
industry how how did how did your food
consumption change from the beginning of
this book Till the End of This Book what
were there any particular choices that
you have unmade or made because of what
you learned in the process of writing
this book I think resist existing
addictions if you live with addiction is
almost impossible that's the whole point
about addiction MH and what you need to
do is to make the journey from being
addicted to being disgusted and love and
disgust are quite they're they're
anatomically close in the brain they're
neurologically quite related and many of
us have experienced this falling out of
love process where something you're in
something or someone you're infatuated
with that is irresistible you want to
spend all your time engaging with
um suddenly becomes something you really
don't want to do and smokers will
describe it some people have this
experience in human relationships um it
it can happen that switch can be flicked
quite quickly and I think if you're
someone who lives with addiction you
need to figure out how to flick that
switch that at the moment if you're
addicted to this food and you constantly
trying to resist it it it will be too
much so I I think that that is kind of
the priority if you're living with the
addiction is to try and get to disgust
and that's what happened to me is the
food became you know this thing about
the uncanny valley where if if um
there's a thing in animations where if
animations are very cartoony they're
fine but if they become quite human they
suddenly start looking weird there's
some films where they get it a bit wrong
um uh where the where the cartoon
characters are too realistic they they
become almost zombie or corpse likee and
so this this uncanny valley that
animation goes through where it becomes
weird and then when Ultra human that
they're fine again the food for me was a
bit like that it entered this sort of
uncanny valley where it's it's similar
to food but it it isn't food and so so
now I just don't want any of it but I
will eat it to be polite this stuff that
I that I brought with
me you know the the pizzas I got the
cocoa pops I've got the the Coca-Cola
here is this
food I don't think it me
so food is very poorly defined we don't
have a working definition of food sort
of in law but I think food is
substance that you eat for nourishment
and it should be about nourishment
culturally socially personally
psychologically as well as physically
and these products are uh developed to
generate financialized growth for
institutional investors they're not made
by people who love you who want to
nourish you and so I don't think it
meets what I think is a useful cultural
definition of food I think it's very
useful to not think of them as food and
I don't think a mixture of um coloring
addictive drugs and phosphoric acid
could be called food in any sense of the
word it doesn't have nutrition it only
has things that will we're we're pretty
sure that almost every ingredient does
you harm in some way so I I don't see
how that could be called food it's a way
of commodifying your ill health for the
benefit of a very small number of people
are you optimistic sck oh that's such a
great question like I live with and I
want the real answer that's sort of
oh you could ask me you get a different
answer each morning so at the moment uh
here are my sources of optimism there is
another way of doing this I have a
friend who runs a not for-profit Drug
Company works as a normal drug company
has a huge quantity of Revenue only one
person took a pay cut that was the CEO
so he doesn't own it everyone else is
paid exactly as if they're at a normal
pharmaceutical company the purpose of
and he paid back investors it's a
really it would be cool for you to
interview actually he's one of the the
smartest people I know he came from Big
farmer and because he's not obliged to
institutional investors he develops
drugs for low-income settings he also
sells them in middle and high income
settings and does really a great job but
the purpose of the company is to reduce
Healthcare inequalities now there are
lots of people who are working on a
similar model that will sit within you
know a capital capitalist structure that
will pay back investors but where food
needn't become so beholden to
institutional investors so I think there
are financial reasons for optimism there
are economic models we can we can
propose corporate structures we can
incorporate things in different ways
that will serve the community in
different ways that's one source of
optimism the second source of optimism
is we sort of did it with tobacco and
the cool terrible thing about tobacco is
we regulated the tobacco industry and
got smoking rates right down
and the um growth of equity value of the
tobacco companies has continued more or
less uninterrupted throughout now part
of that comes from selling cigarettes in
other countries some of it comes from
the rise of vaping but nonetheless we
did manage to get control of tobacco so
as a public health activist I have a
template I know how to do it I know how
to tackle marketing um and we we have a
road map and we also know that people
are Furious I mean people are enraged
for 40 years we've watched particularly
our children not just get bigger but get
shorter so if you have kids if you have
kids in this country by the age of five
they will be that much shorter than if
you had kids in Scandinavia or Bulgaria
or the Netherlands okay that at the age
of five that much 9 cm that is the
difference between a British 5-year-old
and a Bulgarian 5-year-old and is his
all diet so it's not just our kids live
with the beasty they are stunted now you
can't stunt a body by 9 cm at the age of
five and not also stunt them
intellectually
so people are Furious we sort of know
this is happening we know we can't stop
eating this food we obesity is all
around us and so I I think there is real
real uh
momentum for people to to reclaim their
foods and we do we do have a lot of
amazing food cultures in this country
that we can draw for kind of Rich
phenomenal diets might explain why the
US is so poor from an education
standpoint to some degree you know what
I mean because they always rank at the
very bottom of the education tables it's
the same in the it's about the same in
the US the stunt the physical stunting
and physical stunting once we once you
get rid of cigarette smoking during
pregnancy which is still far too high
it's really it's really all due to diet
so there's all those causes of optimism
and yet I also I'm up against the the
power any one of these corporations has
revenues equivalent to the GDP of a of a
pretty decent sized country like
Venezuela or Croatia yeah so and that's
any one of the the companies do you know
this is just such conspiracy theory that
I just popped into my head about my own
childhood um I'm the youngest of four
right and if we just look at the
brothers so there's three of us Brothers
I'm the youngest brother and Kevin my
oldest brother is a monster he's like 65
or something even Jason is like 63 and
then I'm short and I'm like short in
comparison to them I'm 61 but they're so
much there're so much taller than me and
I did I was thinking about it as you're
speaking my mother did make homecooked
foods she was at home during
my my older brothers and sisters um as
they were growing up so she was cooking
in the house the whole time African food
lots of Whole Foods and chickens and
vegetables and salads any traditional
diet like any traditional diet yeah and
then she started businesses and stopped
coming home so I was a scavenger and I
had like free reain to go to the Sweet
Shop and eat not not so good things so I
was just thinking about I've always
wondered why I'm why I'm shorter than
them and I'm younger but maybe there's
sted physically and intellectually maybe
I think you're going to difficulty
selling people on this but I mean it is
an intriguing point we know about
youngest people in in the in in Europe
that youngest children are about I don't
know I don't know that D they're about
five IQ points uh less smart because IDI
of the family as well my brothers are
absolute super they're like um they're
like mathletes in the UK my brother was
rewriting the textbook he was on the
front of the Plymouth Herald because of
his bloody the grades that he got I
think it was the Plymouth Herald it's
one of the newspapers he was in there
and Kevin was even smarter he was a
another Super Genius I got kicked out of
school I was it is really I mean that
idea of eating a sort of traditional
home-cooked whole food
diet versus your probably quite High UPF
I I mean I it was the datas you know
you're you're one case but we build
evidence out of case studies you know I
love that idea I'm not sure I can really
accept you as kind of intellectually and
physically stunted sitting across from
you no but academically they were just
so much so they still are so far ahead
of me in fact Jason now works in my
company just to help me with everything
because he's so smart we there's there's
a pair of twins I know who separated at
Birth adopted in China separated at
Birth they're quite well known I've
interviewed them for for a podcast and
one grew up in Norway one grew up in the
states genetically identical and the
Norwegian twin is is that much taller
than the American twin so we we do see
these natural experiments too it's crazy
how's your brother getting on so he
maybe the biggest effect of the book is
he kind of I
stopped a message in the book and I
would say this because people people are
listening and listeners are selfish we
like how do I lose the way how do I quit
UPF well I've said that but the the
bigger thing is don't beat your loved
ones over the head with this so many
people like I'm going to buy your book
for my wife or husband or daughter or
I'm going to tell my kids and and when
we let people go and we stop owning
their problems it gives them agency it
empowers them and and then it's up to
them to decide and they if they have the
resources and the opportunities
generally they will and so a big a kind
of core message of the book is stop
nagging your loved ones about their food
their food is controlled by forces that
are far bigger than you they know what
to eat nagging people about their weight
only stresses them out and makes it
worse so when I it was when I Let Go
properly of what zand eats and stop
really really stopped caring about him
and and started to kind of not see him
as an extension of myself because when
he he would be big in public you know we
work together as television presenters
and I'd be like God you're embarrassing
me like we're trying to talk about
health and medicine to kids and look at
you and when I let all that go and saw
him as like you know he's such a
wonderful person I love him so much who
who cares about his weight that enabled
him to sort of engage with it then lots
of other things happened he's just got
married to a public health academic um
uh he's got resources he got a bit older
I mean all kinds of things happen so
much of life is is luck we can tell
these narratives of how someone got from
A to B but he's very fortunate and I
think celebrating weight loss is just
something I'm I'm so anxious about doing
but he yeah he a big product of the book
was an improvement in my relationship
with him because I stopped caring what
he ate I find it so interesting why
people decide to make changes in their
life and it's so different for everybody
I've I've wondered and pondered
whether sometimes we need a little bit
more pain
you
know I can't forget a conversation I had
with a manager of one of the top music
artists in this country that was
struggling and this person was a friend
of mine the person struggling and I kind
of went to him and I was like listen how
can I help and he goes you can't he goes
um I've managed a lot of music artists
that have struggled with addictions of
various kinds and at some point they'll
reach a rock bottom and they'll decide
themselves that they need to make a
change and it's such a hard thing to
accept just to kind of let someone in
your view go into freefall in an area of
your life you want to catch them you
want to hold them up and support them
that that Moment of
clarity of decision that's when we've
all had it switch suddenly flick that
can never arise as long as someone else
is telling it and the the clearest
example of this is the washing up that
my you know I you know we've got a
family and everyone's and sometimes as
I'm about to heroically at the end of a
meal get up and do all the wash washing
up my wife will say to me could you
clear these plates and do the washing up
and I've gone from being an empowered
person with agency about to heroically
do my bit for the family to being
someone doing the bidding of someone
else and I it enrages me and we do it to
each other so just allowing other people
to grasp their problems um and deal with
them or not is you know that's that's
it's a really hard journey for a doctor
because doctors are all about telling
you about yourself and I try and do it
lesson
it kind of reminds me a little bit of
what I was saying earlier about um I
don't like it when it feels like I'm
being controlled yeah yeah and that's
kind of what the food food environment
we live in makes me feel like it makes
me feel like I don't have a choice you
don't and I want to have a choice you
don't really have a choice I mean if you
have enough money and you're really
prepared to get up early in the morning
you have some choices but our our food
food choices are severely curtailed and
if you're on a Motorway if you're
traveling around this country if you
just if you try and go out on that High
Street out there and just buy yourself a
quick lunch there aren't a lot of
choices the pain thing's interesting we
need a little bit of pain in our diet we
need foods that are bitter and real and
chewy and crunchy and make us work for
them and take time to prepare and one of
the big switches is trying to see food
preparation not as a chore but as
something that connects you to your
ancestors I mean you know we've survived
because we come from this long chain of
people who just spent hours a day
grinding and pulverizing and salting and
mashing and figuring out how to make
food to nourish this and it's a thing we
should do with other people and it you
know that trying to enjoy food prep is
is is a big change for me second ago I
asked you if you're optimistic and you
you gave me I dodged it you gave me the
RE you did a little bit but you gave me
the reasons for being optimistic what
are the reasons you're
pessimistic I think because when it came
to Tobacco Control it took from from the
certainty that tobacco caused not just
lung cancer but but Strokes heart
attacks and a whole range of other
health outcomes including early death
the same list of Health outcomes that
Ultra processed food
causes uh from that knowledge to proper
regulation took 50 60 years and because
around uh a signific a significant
percentage of of women still smoke
throughout pregnancy in this country you
know which is a good Benchmark of of not
succeeding they're they're highly
motivated to St anded and unable to and
we see the rise of Vapes so it's an arms
race you know I'm I'm a virologist by
training my PhD is in studying how
viruses compete with humans and in an
arms race you never get ahead for very
long it's like business business is a
great example of an arms race you
understand arms RAC is better than
anyone you can't just build your company
and be like well that's that's done home
I go let's watch the money flow you
someone's always always trying to
overtake you and so we're we're as a as
a community of activists what we need to
build is a is a sustainable form of
activism that is you build regulation
you build on that you keep generating
evidence and there are some we have more
and more ways of doing it with these
sustainable non for-profit not
for-profit food companies for example as
a way of funding
activism so are you
optimistic I have to be I mean nothing
worth achieving will be achieved in our
lifetime so this will not be just the
work of my lifetime and I'm I'm
inheriting this work uh many of us are
inheriting this work from a generation
of people who've been slaving at this
since Nestle were indicted for uh
aggressively marketing infant formula in
very very low-income settings and really
harming children in in low-income
countries so you know that that was kind
of the first engagement with big food
where people were were angry and we
could really point to a problem and
those activists now they're my they're
my they're 20 30 years older than me and
they're they're sort of handing
knowledge to me and a whole bunch of
other people across around the around
the world people from the global South
people from very diverse communities and
so we're you know I'm going to hand this
to my kids but you know there's a fight
and you can be on one side of it I
guess Chris we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to leave it
for and the question that's been left
for you is what
will
we also has a little brackets and says
you reget in 10 years about how we
brought up our children
today I can tell you because I already
regret it and it's it's not spending the
kind of quality time that I've just
given you with
them that you know to spend time with
you today I prepared I thought about it
I've read your book I've you know I've
been listening to the podcast for ages
and as a result we've had at least what
feels to me like quite a meaningful
engagement it's really nice I leave kind
of enriched and my kids get this these
sort of snatches at time of time and you
you talk about diarising lunch and I
know this is this is a thing you you
talk about in lots of places it's not
just giving the crumbs to your family
but it's like giving the investing in
your family in the way you do in your
work and I I don't do it because you
know my wife's pregnant I've got two
kids six and three and and it's just a
scramble so that's what I will regret
and and it's great actually being given
the opportunity to articulate that and
go okay if I'm going to regret it who do
I want to be and you know I love that
question I'm going to go away and try
and force time with them that that I'm
present and often they don't want
they're not interested but it's just
being there listening to them and and uh
investing in them regularly in the way
that that I do with everything else in
my life Chris thank you so much because
you you um I feel like this book I think
it's been in the Sunday Times best
seller chart for like 25 24 weeks was
something mental um you you knocked me
off number one oh listen you're I'm just
visiting you live there so I'll be there
for another 5 Seconds you I'm sure
you'll be there for for many many uh
many more weeks and you're starting a
really important Revolution and
conversation around what we eat a really
important one and books come along once
in a once in a while once every couple
of years once in a generation that
really meet culture at the exact moment
with the exact language with the exact
appreciation of the reader the Nuance
the um
inclusivity um not taking provocative
stances that are so far on the right or
so far on the left that they alienate a
certain group they kind of bring
everyone in and they appreciate both
sides of that nuance and that
perspective and this is exactly what
this book does perfectly timed written
perfectly to appeal to both sides
of the most tricky
narratives um and that is why it's such
a brilliant book and that's why
everybody needs to read it because as
you said I think before we started
recording it's starting a conversation
that we really need to start and it's
and it's these books that end up
changing changing the world and changing
legislation so congratulations first and
foremost but thank you secondly for
writing such an important book at such
an important time I'm really blushing I
mean this there there's very few people
I'd hear that from the new it really
means a huge amount so thank
you we've got an exciting new sponsor on
this podcast and I couldn't be more
excited to announce that we're now
working with Shopify and if there's one
tool that I use pretty much every single
day in my businesses that is certainly
Shopify I'm sure you've all heard about
Shopify but for some reason if you
haven't then Shopify is the Commerce
platform that is revolutionizing
millions of businesses worldwide whether
you're starting a side hustle a new
project with a friend or a global
business Shopify I has you covered you
guys may know that we recently sold a
product on this platform called the Dio
conversation cards which featured
questions from the guests in these
episodes and from start to finish from
launching that product we used Shopify a
total Game Changer makes life incredibly
incredibly smooth when it relates to
business and a tool that my team have
absolutely loved using which is not
always the case with technology we
couldn't have launched those
conversation cards without it and if you
guys haven't tried Shopify out for
yourself then I highly suggest you do
head to shopify.com Bartlet to take your
business to the next level today and let
me know how you get on that's
shopify.com Bartlet let me know how you
get
[Music]
on